Kickoff (#521)
primer/design: content/components/selectpanel.mdx

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/d396ea70-d8a5-4e52-ae3e-7596a3ef39b6"
/>

The select panel is composed of three main areas: a header, a scrollable list, and an optional footer.

- **Header:** The header always includes a title and a close button. Additionally, it can have an optional search/filter field to find items quicker. When a selection is made, a "Deselect all" button should also be present visually within the input on the far right.
- **List (scrollable):** The scrollable list consists of [action list](/components/action-list) items, which can be either single or multi-select options.

> - **Footer (Optional):** For multi-select scenarios, the select panel should include a footer that incorporates a "Cancel" and an "Apply" button also refered to as declaritive actions. If any additional controls are required, such as an extra checkbox or button, a footer becomes necessary as well in single selections.

Author: Makes sense. Fixed!

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/17c26b4f-e4ac-4120-8714-1bfffc2b73da"
/>

### Trigger

<img width="960" alt="" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/f2867468-4606-4999-8ea7-21860e50051d" />

Select panels can be activated by either a regular [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu item](/components/action-menu). If the button is intended to represent the current selection, it's crucial to have a label associated with it, either internally (within the button) or externally (adjacent to the button).

### List (single select)

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Multi-select"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/928a4bb2-c3f8-4620-9e37-42d9b91204c1"
/>

If your selection doesn't trigger a serie of events upon submission and doesn't include a checkbox in the footer, you may consider not adding a cancel/save button. In this scenario, when a selection is made, the select panel will instantly close similar to a menu. This behavior is indicated by a checkmark on the selected item.
For example switching a branch is easily reversible and doesn't pose any risk of sending notifications to other users.

> However, if the select panel does cause a serie events upon selection or if the footer includes additional form elements like a checkbox, it becomes necessary to include cancel/save buttons. In such cases, the behavior is indicated visually by radio buttons, which allows users to confirm their choices, before submitting their selections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if the select panel does cause a series of events upon selection or if the footer includes additional form elements like a checkbox, it becomes necessary to include cancel/save buttons. In such cases, the behavior is indicated visually by radio buttons, which allows users to confirm their choices, before submitting their selections.
```

For example setting the wrong assignee on an pull request poses the risk of sending notifications to the wrong user therefore the cancel/save button is crucial.

### List (multi-select)

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Multi-select"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/bfaa7eca-9a12-432d-9184-38f024a7cd32"
/>

The multi-select list allows you to choose multiple items from a list and has additional features like **select all** or **indeterminate selections**.

The **select all** option at the top of the list allows for quickly deselecting or selecting all values.
However, when implementing search functionality, this option becomes unavailable.

We highly recommend utilizing the search functionality instead of retrieving extensive lists from our API endpoints to enable the select all feature. By doing so, you can avoid potential performance issues, especially considering that this component lacks virtualization capabilities.

> The **indeterminate selections** option is useful for performing bulk actions on lists. For example, if you have 20 selected items, but some of them have different labels attached, an indeterminate checkbox (represented by a horizontal line) is shown for labels that are not set on all items.

Reviewer: This interaction pattern is still very confusing to me in terms of just user experience. I don't know if we need to make a change in this doc but I just want to note it.

## Anatomy

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Select panel for assigning labels to an issue. 'Apply labels to this issue' heading, close button in upper right hand corner. Search input with a magnifer icon as a visible label, listbox of label options and the first three are selected with a visual checkbox. The footer contains a button to edit labels, and cancel and apply buttons. Purple labels are overlayed onto select panel: Overlay (dialog) pointing to the container, Search input pointing to the input, role='listbox' bracket of the listbox content, Optional action control to the button in the lower left corner, Explicit confirm / submission buttons bracket for the apply and cancel buttons in the lower right corner."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/6e4b27cc-7a90-4958-af26-791c23e02b7d"
/>

The select panel is composed of three main areas: a header, a scrollable list, and an optional footer.

> - **Header:** The header always includes a title and a close button. Additionally, it can have an optional search/filter field to find items quicker. When a selection is made, a "clear all" button should also be present.

Author: Updated!

> - **List (scrollable):** The scrollable list consists of [action list](/components/action-list) items, which can be either single or multi-select options.

Author: I would assume so: https://github.com/primer/react/blob/d8bbbb36d1c619527d69e0ce1a9715ba5a48f502/src/ActionList/List.tsx#L55

/>

### Trigger

<img width="960" alt="" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/f6a1e670-2682-4ce7-8642-24943084c812" />

Select panels can be activated by either a regular [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu](/components/action-menu). If the button is intended to represent the current selection, it's crucial to have a label associated with it, either internally (within the button) or externally (adjacent to the button).

### List (single select)

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Multi-select"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/3d0cc2b5-b958-4b62-805e-f77a9d7bf0d9"
/>

If the select panel doesn't have an additional checkbox in the footer, you can make an instant selection. This means that the select panel will close as soon as you make the selection.

However, if there is an additional form element required for that selection, such as checking an additional option, it is necessary to have a cancel and confirmation button. This prevents the dialog from unexpectedly closing when you click an option, allowing you to review and confirm your selection.

> To indicate an instant selection, we use checkmarks to show the selected option. For regular single selects, we use visually styled radio buttons. Note they are not semantically radio buttons.

Author: Updated this and I've tried to avoid difficult terminology. Could you have a read now: 

```
If your selection doesn't trigger a serie of events upon submission and doesn't include a checkbox in the footer, you may consider not adding a cancel/save button. In this scenario, when a selection is made, the select panel will instantly close similar to a menu. This behavior is indicated by a checkmark on the selected item.
For example switching a branch is easily reversible and doesn't pose any risk of sending notifications to other users.

However, if the select panel does cause a serie events upon selection or if the footer includes additional form elements like a checkbox, it becomes necessary to include cancel/save buttons. In such cases, the behavior is indicated visually by radio buttons, which allows users to confirm their choices, before submitting their selections.
For example setting the wrong assignee on an pull request poses the risk of sending notifications to the wrong user therefore the cancel/save button is crucial.
```

### List (multi-select)

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Multi-select"

>   src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/33176d07-2853-4318-bf5d-df395e700fa9"

Author: Bulk selections in the list primitive could mean that items within the list have an indeterminate status as well.

/>

The multi-select list allows you to choose multiple items from a list and has additional features like `select all` or `indeterminate selections`.

The `select all` option at the top of the list allows for quickly deselecting or selecting all values.
However, when you separate items in groups this option isn't available anymore.

Additionally, It can only be used when all available options can be returned. As an example, if the list is too large to retrieve all options at once such as API endpoints returning limited results then this feature may not be suitable.

> We should refrain from putting a strain on API endpoints to return all the possible results at once as this could result in a performance downgrade in a scenario of large lists as virtualization is currently not built into this component.

Author: Specs slightly changed on this:

```
The multi-select list allows you to choose multiple items from a list and has additional features like select all or indeterminate selections.

The select all option at the top of the list allows for quickly deselecting or selecting all values. However, when implementing search functionality, this option becomes unavailable.

We highly recommend utilizing the search functionality instead of retrieving extensive lists from our API endpoints to enable the select all feature. By doing so, you can avoid potential performance issues, especially considering that this component lacks virtualization capabilities.

The indeterminate selections option is useful for performing bulk actions on lists. For example, if you have 20 selected items, but some of them have different labels attached, an indeterminate checkbox (represented by a horizontal line) is shown for labels that are not set on all items.
```

> The `indeterminate selections` option is useful for performing bulk actions on lists. For example, if you have 20 selected items, but some of them have different labels attached, an indeterminate checkbox (represented by a horizontal line) is shown for labels that are not set on all items.

Author: If you do bulk selections in our index pages on issues you do this on a selection in the list. In this case some items could have labels assigned and other don't. In this case they are indeterminate selections.

### Footer

<img
  width="1388"
  alt="Footers"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/85bcb93b-3d39-4635-ad1b-68243dae6bd9"
/>

The optional footer at the bottom could include a single link, button or
checkbox to take additional actions.

> In case of a multi selection or a single selection with additional actions in the footer, we recommend a "Cancel" and "Apply" button unless you clearly [understand the accessibility implications](#cancelsubmit) of not adding this.

Author: Fixed

### Current selection

<img width="960" alt="" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/b1c517f4-8cc0-423b-83ac-da348aec8e76" />

In order to present a clear summary of the current selection, we create a group at the top of the list.
This appears after clearing the search input or after closing and reopening the select panel.

> However, it's crucial we don't create this group immediately after selecting an item, as it may cause reordering of the items and potentially confuse the users.

Author: This does't apply anymore because we moved away from grouping those and just order the default list based on selections first.

### Loading

It is important to provide visual cues to the user when certain processes may take longer than expected. Loading states can be utilized at different stages of using this component to communicate this information effectively.

<img
  width="1668"
  alt="First select panel is a branch switcher control that includes tabs, a search input, a listbox with single-select items, and a footer with an All branches link, and cancel and apply buttons. Second select panel is titled 'Show fields, with a list of about 10 multi-select items and apply and cancel buttons in the footer."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/52bcce0e-bed4-44e8-83b4-8ca6bf80eb57"
/>

1. **Initial**: This loading state is used when retrieving the initial data to prevent users from seeing an empty list. Skeleton loaders can be used if the data is expected to arrive within 500 milliseconds.
2. **Searching/Filtering**: When users perform a search to fetch new items, it is important to maintain their current selections or allow them to continue making selections. In this case, a more minimal loading state should be used to indicate ongoing activity.

> 3. **Confirmation**: If your layout does not incorporate optimistic updates or lacks error messaging for failed updates, it is crucial to use a confirmation button as a loading state to clearly communicate the progress of the update.

Reviewer: What's an "optimistic update"? 😅

Author: https://medium.com/@kyledeguzmanx/what-are-optimistic-updates-483662c3e171 😅

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/6e4b27cc-7a90-4958-af26-791c23e02b7d"
/>

The select panel is composed of three main areas: a header, a scrollable list, and an optional footer.

- **Header:** The header always includes a title and a close button. Additionally, it can have an optional search/filter field to find items quicker. When a selection is made, a "clear all" button should also be present.
- **List (scrollable):** The scrollable list consists of [action list](/components/action-list) items, which can be either single or multi-select options.

> - **Footer (Optional):** In most cases, especially in multi-select scenarios, the select panel includes a footer that incorporates a "Cancel" and an "Apply" button also refered to as declaritive actions. If any additional controls are required, such as an extra checkbox or button, a footer becomes necessary as well.

Reviewer: Yeah, let's be more explicit; it's not optional for some cases

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/17c26b4f-e4ac-4120-8714-1bfffc2b73da"
/>

### Trigger

<img width="960" alt="" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/f6a1e670-2682-4ce7-8642-24943084c812" />

Select panels can be activated by either a regular [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu](/components/action-menu). If the button is intended to represent the current selection, it's crucial to have a label associated with it, either internally (within the button) or externally (adjacent to the button).

### List (single select)

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Multi-select"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/3d0cc2b5-b958-4b62-805e-f77a9d7bf0d9"
/>

If the select panel doesn't have an additional checkbox in the footer, you can make an instant selection. This means that the select panel will close as soon as you make the selection.

> However, if there is an additional form element required for that selection, such as checking an additional option, it is necessary to have a cancel and confirmation button. This prevents the dialog from unexpectedly closing when you click an option, allowing you to review and confirm your selection.

Author: Right! This is a mess. 😅

**Updated to:**

If the select panel doesn't have an additional checkbox in the footer, an instant selection can be made, resulting in the panel closing immediately upon selection. This behavior is indicated by a checkmark on the items.

On the other hand, when the footer includes a checkbox it requires the presence of both a cancel and confirmation button. This allows users to utilize the checkbox before they confirm their choices. Visual radio buttons in the items convey this behavior, although they are not semantically radio buttons.

> To indicate an instant selection, we use checkmarks to show the selected option. For regular single selects, we use visually styled radio buttons. Note they are not semantically radio buttons.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure users will pick up on this distinction. If that's correct, we don't gain much by introducing a new selection indicator and it would be better to just have 1.

I don't feel strongly against this, so I'm curious what @maximedegreve and other reviewers think.

Reviewer 3: I think I would prefer to just only use radio and checkbox styles in SelectPanel but this is not a strongly held opinion.

Author: Could you both go here: https://comfy-lamington-a4610e.netlify.app/explorer

And change selection to `single`.
Then toggle declarative. 

Hopefully this demonstrates a bit better the reasoning about this.

If you don't have declarative buttons the dialog becomes more a menu and the checkmarks can help indicate that. Clicking at this point this will close the dialog and instantly apply the selection.

The radio buttons on the other hand provide a more form feeling due to the declarative buttons. This design already appears in many dialog designs and feels more consistent.

Let me know what you think?

> ### List (multi select)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### List (multi-select)
```

> ### List (multi select)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### List (multi-select)
```

> ### List (multi select)

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking nitpick: It feels a little strange that we use the `<code>` style for some of the text in here:
- select all
- indeterminate selections
- select all

Maybe _emphasis_ or **strong** would be better?

Author: This is good feedback though. Change to **strong**!

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Multi-select"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/33176d07-2853-4318-bf5d-df395e700fa9"
/>

The multi-select list allows you to choose multiple items from a list and has additional features like `select all` or `indeterminate selections`.

The `select all` option at the top of the list allows for quickly deselecting or selecting all values.

> However, when you separate items in groups this option isn't available anymore.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what you mean by "separate items in groups"

Author: Updated this to be more clear based on the API exploration I did:
`However, when implementing search functionality, this option becomes unavailable.`

Additionally, It can only be used when all available options can be returned. As an example, if the list is too large to retrieve all options at once such as API endpoints returning limited results then this feature may not be suitable.
We should refrain from putting a strain on API endpoints to return all the possible results at once as this could result in a performance downgrade in a scenario of large lists as virtualization is currently not built into this component.

> The `intermediate selections` option is useful for performing bulk actions on lists. For example, if you have 20 selected items, but some of them have different labels attached, an indeterminate checkbox (represented by a horizontal line) is shown for labels that are not set on all items.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `indeterminate selections` option is useful for performing bulk actions on lists. For example, if you have 20 selected items, but some of them have different labels attached, an indeterminate checkbox (represented by a horizontal line) is shown for labels that are not set on all items.
```

### Footer

<img
  width="1388"
  alt="Footers"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/85bcb93b-3d39-4635-ad1b-68243dae6bd9"
/>

The optional footer at the bottom could include a single link, button or
checkbox to take additional actions.

> In case of a multi selection or a single selection with additional actions in the footer, we always recommend a `cancel` and `apply` button unless you clearly [understand the accessibility implications](#cancelsubmit) of not adding this.

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking nitpick: Saying "always" felt strange here since we talk about select panels that automatically close in previous sections.

```suggestion
In case of a multi selection or a single selection with additional actions in the footer, we recommend a "Cancel" and "Apply" button unless you clearly [understand the accessibility implications](#cancelsubmit) of not adding this.
```

### Current selection

<img width="960" alt="" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/b1c517f4-8cc0-423b-83ac-da348aec8e76" />

In order to present a clear summary of the current selection, we create a group at the top of the list.

> This is visible when clearing the search input or when the select panel is reopened.

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking nitpick: This phrasing just sounds clearer to me.

```suggestion
This appears after clearing the search input or after closing and reopening the select panel.
```

> However, it's crucial we don't create this group immediately after selecting an item, as it may cause reordering of the items and potentially confuse the users.

Reviewer 2: Since there is no hard return between each of these sentences, there are no line breaks. I think this is totally fine, but I want to make sure that's what you intended.

Author: Good spot! I've changed this whole sentence and image as the specs slightly changed. We're not treating it as a separate group anymore because this was confusing for some people internal that after deselecting all items in the selected group the group would still exist visually.

### Error/Warning

<img
  width="1466"
  alt="Error"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/135d597a-33cd-4ba1-a86b-241a1b5bdfcb"
/>

Sometimes, we encounter situations where things don't work as expected, or we need to inform users about something important. There are various ways to handle these scenarios depending on the situation.

For instance, if the default values fail to load initially, we display an error placeholder to let the user know that something went wrong.

When the initial values are loaded and the user performs a search for new values, there may be instances where the search fails. In such cases, it is essential to ensure that the user can still make a selection without losing their current selection. Instead, we display an error message at the top of the list, notifying the user about the search failure while preserving their ability to continue with their selection process.

> For errors we should always include a link to our support page to ensure that users have a way to reach out to us for assistance.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about this recommendation. There may be errors that support can't do anything about, and it would be a waste of the user's time to contact support.

### Empty state

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Error"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/57386be3-6e16-4862-b557-d14533b3ef28"
/>

When no results are available, it is essential to offer users an explanation instead of leaving a blank space. There can be various reasons for the absence of results. It could be due to the search or filter input value not matching any available data, or it could be because the user has yet to generate any data to display.

> ### Limit selections

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Limited selections
```

When the user reaches the maximum allowed number of selections, we need to display a warning message indicating that they have reached their limit. This can also be an opportunity to provide a link for upgrading their account if the restriction is related to a paid feature. It is worth noting that the warning message is labeled with an `aria-live` attribute, ensuring that users with screen readers receive a notification when the message appears.

### Loading

It is important to provide visual cues to the user when certain processes may take longer than expected. Loading states can be utilized at different stages of using this component to communicate this information effectively.

<img
  width="1668"
  alt="First select panel is a branch switcher control that includes tabs, a search input, a listbox with single-select items, and a footer with an All branches link, and cancel and apply buttons. Second select panel is titled 'Show fields, with a list of about 10 multi-select items and apply and cancel buttons in the footer."

>   src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/52bcce0e-bed4-44e8-83b4-8ca6bf80eb57"

Reviewer 2: We might not want to include avatars in the skeleton. I'm not sure we'll be able to know if the items have avatars or not.

Author: @ichelsea what are the accessibility concerns with skeleton loaders? Could we perhaps always use skeleton loaders? This would simplify the API and creates more consistency?

/>

> 1. **Initial**: This loading state is used when retrieving the initial data to prevent users from seeing an empty list. Skeleton loaders can be used if the data is expected to arrive within 500 milliseconds.

Reviewer 2: We might not know how long we can "expect" results to arrive, so it's hard to know whether or not to use a skeleton loader. I also don't understand why the expected wait time affects the style of the loading indicator.

Author: Agree. [Let's see what the response is to this.](https://github.com/primer/design/pull/521#discussion_r1277364259)

> 1. **Initial**: This loading state is used when retrieving the initial data to prevent users from seeing an empty list. Skeleton loaders can be used if the data is expected to arrive within 500 milliseconds.

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking nitpick: I got confused when I saw 4 example images and only 3 items in this list. Maybe "Initial (skeleton)" should get it's own list item?

Author: Fixed. I think it would be good to make a call on the skeleton loader or the normal loader instead of providing two options. [Let's see what @ichelsea says](https://github.com/primer/design/pull/521#discussion_r1277364259).

import ComponentLayout from '~/src/layouts/component-layout'
export default ComponentLayout

<Note>

>   This component is currently under development in React and ViewComponents and might not have all it's functionality

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This component is currently under development in React and Rails and might not have all it's functionality
```

Recently I learned people don't know what View Components are 😛

- **List (scrollable):** The scrollable list consists of [action list](/components/action-list) items, which can be either single or multi-select options.
- **Footer (Optional):** In most cases, especially in multi-select scenarios, the select panel includes a footer that incorporates a "Cancel" and an "Apply" button also refered to as declaritive actions. If any additional controls are required, such as an extra checkbox or button, a footer becomes necessary as well.

## Options

The select panel provides flexibility by offering both simple list-based single selection and multi-selection options. Additionally, it can become more sophisticated by incorporating advanced features such as filtering functionality and the inclusion of links.

<img
  width="960"
  alt="First select panel is a branch switcher control that includes tabs, a search input, a listbox with single-select items, and a footer with an All branches link, and cancel and apply buttons. Second select panel is titled 'Show fields, with a list of about 10 multi-select items and apply and cancel buttons in the footer."

>   src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/17c26b4f-e4ac-4120-8714-1bfffc2b73da"

Reviewer 3: Did we decide to use UnderlineNav styles for tabs vs. navigational "tabs"? I feel like there was discussion on this being a confusing pattern. @ichelsea do you have any thoughts?

<img width="258" alt="" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/18661030/b86980a7-2605-42af-b638-9dfd4bb93f72">

/>

### Trigger

> <img width="960" alt="" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/f6a1e670-2682-4ce7-8642-24943084c812" />

Reviewer 3: Should this say "action menu item"? It was a little unclear for me at first.

Author: Good spot! Fixed the acton menu item copy in both the image and markdown.

@ichelsea Do you have an example where we call them `inline labels` in the docs? I couldn't find any references of this after doing a search.

The only argument I could come up with for using `internal` over `inline` is that `inline` often has it's own meaning in CSS.

Right now[ in action menu it's also called external labels](https://primer.style/design/components/action-menu#trigger).

Select panels can be activated by either a regular [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu](/components/action-menu). If the button is intended to represent the current selection, it's crucial to have a label associated with it, either internally (within the button) or externally (adjacent to the button).

### List (single select)

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Multi-select"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/3d0cc2b5-b958-4b62-805e-f77a9d7bf0d9"
/>

> If the select panel doesn't have an additional checkbox in the footer, you can make an instant selection. This means that the select panel will close as soon as you make the selection.

Reviewer 3: Is supporting different types of multi selection new behavior? I don't remember this from the original API work. I feel like this adds a lot of complexity but I'm open to it 😅

Author: I probably have to make it more clear that this is for single selections 😅?

However, if there is an additional form element required for that selection, such as checking an additional option, it is necessary to have a cancel and confirmation button. This prevents the dialog from unexpectedly closing when you click an option, allowing you to review and confirm your selection.

To indicate an instant selection, we use checkmarks to show the selected option. For regular single selects, we use visually styled radio buttons. Note they are not semantically radio buttons.

### List (multi select)

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Multi-select"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/33176d07-2853-4318-bf5d-df395e700fa9"
/>

The multi-select list allows you to choose multiple items from a list and has additional features like `select all` or `indeterminate selections`.

> The `select all` option at the top of the list allows for quickly deselecting or selecting all values
> however when you seperate items in groups this option isn't available anymore.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `select all` option at the top of the list allows for quickly deselecting or selecting all values.
However, when you separate items in groups this option isn't available anymore.
```

> It also can only be used when all available options can be returned. For example if the list is too large to retrieve all options at once,
> such as when using API endpoints with limited results then this feature may not be suitable.
> We should refrain from putting a strain on API endpoints to return all the possible results at once as this could result in a performance downgrade in a scenario of large lists since virtualization is currently not built into this component.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, It can only be used when all available options can be returned. As an example, if the list is too large to retrieve all options at once such as API endpoints returning limited results then this feature may not be suitable.
We should refrain from putting a strain on API endpoints to return all the possible results at once as this could result in a performance downgrade in a scenario of large lists as virtualization is currently not built into this component.
```

This is technical and kind of hard to understand but I see why its here 😄

The `intermediate selections` option is useful for performing bulk actions on lists. For example, if you have 20 selected items, but some of them have different labels attached, an indeterminate checkbox (represented by a horizontal line) is shown for labels that are not set on all items.

### Footer

<img
  width="1388"
  alt="Footers"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/85bcb93b-3d39-4635-ad1b-68243dae6bd9"
/>

The optional footer at the bottom could include a single link, button or
checkbox to take additional actions.

> In case of a multi selection or a single selection with additional actions in the footer we always recommend a `cancel` and `apply` button unless you clearly [understand the accessibility implications](#cancelsubmit) of not adding this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In case of a multi selection or a single selection with additional actions in the footer, we always recommend a `cancel` and `apply` button unless you clearly [understand the accessibility implications](#cancelsubmit) of not adding this.
```

### Loading

It is important to provide visual cues to the user when certain processes may take longer than expected. Loading states can be utilized at different stages of using this component to communicate this information effectively.

<img
  width="1668"
  alt="First select panel is a branch switcher control that includes tabs, a search input, a listbox with single-select items, and a footer with an All branches link, and cancel and apply buttons. Second select panel is titled 'Show fields, with a list of about 10 multi-select items and apply and cancel buttons in the footer."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/52bcce0e-bed4-44e8-83b4-8ca6bf80eb57"
/>

1. **Initial**: This loading state is used when retrieving the initial data to prevent users from seeing an empty list. Skeleton loaders can be used if the data is expected to arrive within 500 milliseconds.
2. **Searching/Filtering**: When users perform a search to fetch new items, it is important to maintain their current selections or allow them to continue making selections. In this case, a more minimal loading state should be used to indicate ongoing activity.

> 3. **Confirmation**: If your layout does not incorporate optimistic updates or lacks error messaging for failed updates, it is crucial to use a confirmation button as a loading state to clearly communicate the progress of the update.

Reviewer 3: I feel like we don't have a solid pattern to support this yet and I know we have some open issues about loading buttons being inaccessible

Author: Are you referring to the loading buttons only?
We [lost a bit of momentum](https://github.com/orgs/github/projects/9922/views/1?pane=issue&itemId=32340306) on this pattern despite that @ichelsea  did all the hard work on it. I've added it to the [SelectPanel epic](https://github.com/orgs/github/projects/9922/views/1?pane=issue&itemId=32340306) to get this over the finish line.

      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/9e643c6b-5d14-4680-b5b5-d7f6f5aa6a6a"
    />
    <Caption>Don’t place the search/filter input in the scrollable area.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

Adopting a smart approach of returning a limited number of items at a time can significantly enhance speed and potentially eliminate the necessity for searching altogether. For instance, instead of presenting the first 20 labels in alphabetical order, providing the most commonly used labels can be more effective. This strategic implementation optimizes the selection process and improves user experience.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/b749a2f3-6449-4edd-9b4a-9c062088230f"
    />
    <Caption>Order the items based on frequency of use.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/926a7ed9-566c-4733-adc5-67b48372c7c5"
    />

>     <Caption>Don’t add frequently used items in a seperate group.</Caption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <Caption>Don’t add frequently used items in a separate group.</Caption>
```

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/22386756-2612-40dd-aceb-1f765095cf17"
    />
    <Caption>When the select panel is triggered by an action menu, it should be presented as a modal dialog.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/a71c59d6-ca35-49ac-b082-e72aa4d1a8cd"
    />
    <Caption>Avoid displaying the select panel as a non-modal submenu within an action menu.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

## Behavior

### Appearance

<img width="1338" alt="" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/28aeeca1-01d7-444f-964f-6a2744c1ced5" />

The select panel can appear as a nonmodal dialog or modal dialog.

- **Nonmodal dialog**: When triggered by a [button](/components/button) or [icon button](/components/icon-button) but never by an [action menu](/components/action-menu).

> - **Modal dialog**: When triggered by a [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu](/components/action-menu).

Reviewer: Small nit, the terms non-modal dialog means that the dialog stays on the screen even when interacting outside of it, and modal means that you can't interact with items outside of it before closing it. Both or neither can have different positional anchoring on the screen.

Author: No nit at all! I meant hereL

```
The select panel can appear as an anchored dialog or floating dialog.

- **Anchored dialog**: When triggered by a [button](/components/button) or [icon button](/components/icon-button) but never by an [action menu](/components/action-menu).
- **Floating dialog**: When triggered by a [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu](/components/action-menu).
```

    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Select panel with a back button, close button, Heading, subheading, five multiple choice options with three of them selected, and apply and cancel buttons."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/71915284-9deb-4acf-9f41-bd2e6f8a58e3"
    />
    <Caption>

>       For multi selection have the user confirm their selection unless an <a href="#cancelsubmit">exception is made</a>.

Reviewer: We should not be allowing exceptions for multi-select. If someone is choosing to incorporate a pattern that will fail WCAG, we definitely shouldn't be advertising that this is happening.

Author: Fixed

      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/926a7ed9-566c-4733-adc5-67b48372c7c5"
    />
    <Caption>Don’t add frequently used items in a seperate group.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Items

Select panels are designed to be lightweight and should not be overloaded with excessive information. For instance, when using a user picker, it is often sufficient to include essential details such as the username, full name, and avatar. Less relevant information, such as the total number of followers or location, can be omitted as it is not as crucial for the selection process.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/b1dd3d5b-c1f6-42b9-a420-d896bc66b746"
    />
    <Caption>Add info that can help differentiate items from each other.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/b74ae429-0af8-4dad-9403-830d678cb38a"
    />

>     <Caption>Avoid repetitive info that can be assumed from it's context. In this instance repository icons.</Caption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <Caption>Avoid repetitive info that can be assumed from it's context. In this instance, repository icons in a list of only repositories.</Caption> 
```

Author: Good call!

  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

Items accompanied by a checkmark icon, as opposed to radio buttons or checkboxes, indicate that the selection panel will automatically close upon making a choice. Therefore, they cannot be used in conjunction with declarative buttons.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/e961e9ce-f716-406b-a7cb-28a01f664f76"
    />

>     <Caption>
>       Use a checkmark icon to indicate that the single select panel will close when clicking an individual item,
>       eliminating the need for declarative buttons.
>     </Caption>

Reviewer: I'm concerned that some might read the last sentence and use this styling in order to eliminate the need for declarative buttons.

```suggestion
    <Caption>
      Use a checkmark icon to indicate that the single select panel will close when clicking an individual item.
    </Caption>
```

    <Caption>
      Don't force users to submit their multi-selection by closing the dialog or auto-updating their choices upon
      selection unless an <a href="#cancelsubmit">exception is made</a>.
    </Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Click-to-dismiss behavior

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/abea97f6-9a67-4ed7-bb52-f19e8c570902"
    />
    <Caption>
      Guide users to save or cancel their selections to dismiss select panel to prevent confusion and data loss.
    </Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/758116fc-0d39-4822-97bb-0b670bea7044"
    />
    <Caption>
      Don’t allow a click-outside-to-dismiss behavior for select panel. Users may be used to closing and submitting the
      information. Doing so would result in a loss of their changes.{' '}
    </Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Search/Filtering

> Including a search or filter input field not only accelerates the selection process for users but also prevents the need to burden the browser or API endpoints with returning extensive lists of items.

Reviewer 2: It would be helpful if we gave some guidance on when you should or should not include a search input.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/babe1e82-c840-4321-a8a1-fcb9e74c335e"
    />
    <Caption>Always keep the search/filter input in the sticky header.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/5838a2ad-1665-42b2-bc90-01044b9df62f"
    />
    <Caption>Don’t place the search/filter input in the scrollable area.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> Adopting a smart approach of returning a limited number of items at a time can significantly enhance speed and potentially eliminate the necessity for searching altogether. For instance, instead of presenting the first 20 labels in alphabetical order, providing the most commonly used labels can be more effective. This strategic implementation optimizes the selection process and improves user experience.

Reviewer 2: ❤️

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/4e11eb8a-c515-49c8-9b48-75330b72a963"
    />
    <Caption>Display a clear button to remove the input value when it is not empty.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/079feed7-4ddc-476a-b639-ea17de141b9d"
    />
    <Caption>Don't forget to show a clear button when the input value is not empty.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

The clear selection [icon button](/components/icon-button) is displayed as soon as at least one item is selected and disappears once the selection is cleared.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."

>       src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/381b2224-3ad0-4320-94cf-8284eb3f5157"

Reviewer 2: I read this as a "clear filters" icon, not "deselect all selections" icon. I have _no_ idea what that icon might look like 😅

Reviewer: Same 😅

Author: I've rewritten this section. Let me know what you think.

>       src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/381b2224-3ad0-4320-94cf-8284eb3f5157"

Reviewer 2: Am I correct in assuming that I shouldn't use a "deselect all selections" button in combination with a list that includes a "Select/deselect all" checkbox?

We might want to add more information so people understand when to use which.

Author: I've rewritten this section. Let me know what you think.

    />
    <Caption>
      When one or more items are selected in a multi-select panel, display a clear button in the header to clear the
      entire selection..
    </Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/af95eaee-976b-48ab-8fb2-b31389318fca"
    />
    <Caption>Don't forget to show a clear button in the header when one or more items are selected.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Seperators

> Separators play a crucial role in clearly distinguishing between different sections, particularly when the item descriptions extends over multiple lines. By utilizing separators, the overall scanning experience for users is greatly enhanced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Separators play a crucial role in clearly distinguishing between different items, particularly when the item descriptions extends over multiple lines. By utilizing separators, the overall scanning experience for users is greatly enhanced.
```

      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/abea97f6-9a67-4ed7-bb52-f19e8c570902"
    />
    <Caption>
      Guide users to save or cancel their selections to dismiss select panel to prevent confusion and data loss.
    </Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/758116fc-0d39-4822-97bb-0b670bea7044"
    />
    <Caption>
      Don’t allow a click-outside-to-dismiss behavior for select panel. Users may be used to closing and submitting the
      information. Doing so would result in a loss of their changes.{' '}
    </Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Search/Filtering

Including a search or filter input field not only accelerates the selection process for users but also prevents the need to burden the browser or API endpoints with returning extensive lists of items.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/babe1e82-c840-4321-a8a1-fcb9e74c335e"
    />

>     <Caption>Always keep the search/filter input in the sticky header.</Caption>

Reviewer 3: Is this another change? I feel like the original API had it in the header for an accessibility reason. Apologies if this has already gone through review and I have outdated information!

  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/15338fee-fa60-493e-a91c-a74f3502330b"
    />
    <Caption>If one or more items has a block description then don't forget to add seperators.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

For items that are unlikely to have descriptions that span multiple lines, separators can be omitted to create a lighter experience.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a clicking action on the apply button."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/1ceb26a9-75cb-4ef8-9fa6-73412540f584"
    />
    <Caption>If all items have inline descriptions or no description at all then omit seperators.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="Mouse cursor indicating a click action outside of the dialog."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/a0166db7-0a1c-4641-b664-c318308fe561"
    />
    <Caption>If all items have inline descriptions or no description then don't add seperators.</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> If seperators are added it's important to ensure that the first and last item in the list has no seperator to avoid visual noise.

Reviewer 3: I dont feel like this last section is necessary, the component will just handle it. Maxime this is the longest interface guideline I have ever seen 😂

Author: I've seen that a few times in Figma files and even the original documentation had this mistake so I got desperate here and tried to clarify that. 😅

Sadly in Figma it can be overridden as well with a toggle. 

I know this is the most complex component I've worked on here so far. 😭

Reviewer 2: I agree with @langermank on this one

Author: Haha I will chill down! Removed!

    />
    <Caption>
      Selecting the submit button or pressing the enter key while focused in the listbox should submit any user input.
    </Caption>
  </div>
</Box>

### Responsive

On smaller viewports, the select panel can be transformed into either a full-screen dialog or a bottom sheet dialog. To ensure usability on touch devices, the confirmation buttons and action list items are also increased to a medium size, ensuring a sufficiently large hit target.

When adding an extra action in the footer, it is important to ensure that it still fits within a 320px viewport.

<img
  width="960"
  alt="mobile"
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/ae6d19c2-7bfa-4357-be65-341c0728b9a8"
/>

See the [Dialog guidelines](https://primer.style/design/components/dialog) for more details.

## Cancel/submit

In most scenarios, we recommend using declarative controls, except for some single-select instances as [demonstrated earlier](#list-single-select).
However, we acknowledge that in specific areas of the product that users interact with frequently throughout the day, employing declarative controls may create the perception of a sluggish experience.

> For example, if the issue creation process involves too many steps, it may discourage customers from reporting issues.

Reviewer: I really don't agree with this statement here. The issues people had with it taking too many steps doesn't deal with the fact that people have to confirm their choices, which hasn't yet been implemented. The issues they encountered was due to poor UI. 

I want to dispel the notion that choosing to confirm selections from a dialog "adds another step", and would prefer to not have that in our official documentation.

Author: Removing this section to push this pull request through.

We are currently [conducting internal experiments](https://github.com/github/platform-ux/issues/1327) to validate those considerations, while closely collaborating with our accessibility auditors to ensure the optimal experience for all users.

Our current position on ommiting declaritive buttons takes in account a mix of considerations:

- **Reversibility**: If the selection has the potential to initiate workflows or send notifications that cannot be easily reversed, then it is not appropriate to make an exception.
- **Passive selections**: Exceptions are more warranted when dealing with selections that are part of a larger form and are not submitted until the user presses the "Send" button. In such cases, it is crucial to ensure that upon closing the select panel, the focus is returned to the trigger element and that this indicates the selection. Passive selections can also be defined as selections that do not directly modify the database.

> - **Frequency of use**: Exceptions are less warranted for settings pages since they are not frequently used. On the other hand, creating an issue is a task that can occur multiple times a day, making an exception more justified in this case.

Reviewer: I don't agree with this one either. We shouldn't be choosing when to implement accessible patterns based on frequency of use. On the contrary, highly visible and highly used features should have the most accessibility built in and should not have exceptions.

Author: Removing this section to push this pull request through.

### Examples

| Feature                               | Reversible | Passive | Frequent | Cancel/Submit |
| ------------------------------------- | :--------: | :-----: | :------: | :-----------: |
| Switching branch                      |    Yes     |   No    |   Yes    |      No       |
| Filter                                |    Yes     |   Yes   |   Yes    |      No       |
| Adding labels to an existing issue    |     No     |   No    |   Yes    |      Yes      |
| Adding labels in the new issue dialog |    Yes     |   Yes   |   Yes    |      No       |

> Internally, we strongly recommend reaching out to our accessibility and design system team to validate your use case for omitting declarative buttons.

Reviewer: If we insist on encouraging that exceptions are allowed by stating it several times in the document, they _need_ to have the accessibility team take a look, and hence we should add a link to our office hours.

Author: Removing this section to push this pull request through.

      width="100%"
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40274682/228390156-dab0b413-3b90-4736-a0e7-8d5d30665c43.mp4"
    />
    <Caption>
      Pressing esc, or selecting “cancel” should close the current dialog and enter focus to the previous trigger. It
      should not retain or submit any user input.
    </Caption>
  </div>
  <div>
    <CustomVideoPlayer
      width="100%"
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40274682/228390297-d6d59818-1d1e-47bb-ac9d-cd1eccc57ba8.mp4"
    />
    <Caption>
      Selecting the submit button or pressing the enter key while focused in the listbox should submit any user input.
    </Caption>
  </div>
</Box>

### Responsive

> On smaller breakpoints, the select panel can be transformed into either a full-screen dialog or a bottom sheet dialog. To ensure usability on touch devices, the confirmation buttons and action list items are also increased to a medium size, ensuring a sufficiently large hit target.

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking nitpick:

```suggestion
On smaller viewports, the select panel can be transformed into either a full-screen dialog or a bottom sheet dialog. To ensure usability on touch devices, the confirmation buttons and action list items are also increased to a medium size, ensuring a sufficiently large hit target.
```

      width="100%"
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40274682/228391029-44ab995b-7a04-4b85-825e-dc77f90838dd.mp4"
    />
    <Caption>
      Keyboard interaction with a single-select select panel demonstrating selection following focus with navigation via
      the ArrowDown key.
    </Caption>
  </div>
</Box>

## Related components

- [Data saving guidelines](/ui-patterns/saving)

> - [Action menu](/components/ActionMenu)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Action menu](/components/action-menu)
```
